Post/jtb we mastered the art of programming (#59)
dot-layer/blog: content/blog/2019-01-07-we-mastered-the-art-of-programming.md

author: Jean-Thomas Baillargeon
date: '2019-01-07'
slug: we-mastered-the-art-of-programming
type: post
tags:
- software engineering
- best practices
description: ""
featured: "we-mastered-the-art-of-programming-cover.jpeg"
featuredpath: "img/headers/"
---

This is probably going to sound cliché and trivial but I just realised that I learned how to use a computer before learning to use a pen. I launched my favorite game on a MS/DOS terminal a few years before writing my name on paper.

This is cliché and trivial since this holds true for many of us data scientist growing up with a computer. We found a way to download music out of napster, limewire or torrents - whatever was working at that time. We figured how to burn our friends’ game on a CD-ROM and then crack it with a fake CD KEY. We learned how to repair the family’s printer. We understood how to connect our laptop to Eduroam. We made very serious and scientific calculations for school points. We then moved to a workplace where we grasp the depth of the `vLookup`. We connected thousands of *Excel* spreadsheets together. We mastered the art of programming.

## problem solving at it's finest.

> What is connecting the dot between all this, is the curiosity and the satisfaction of solving a problem, a computer problem. We make things work. This is how we get points on a school assignment. This is how our boss sees us as the achiever. This is how we create pure value. Based on this, it only makes sense that the faster you solve a computer problem, the better you are.

Reviewer: What connects est plus approprié
... all this is (pas de virgule)

> But computer problem seldom get stashed away once solved. They come back to haunt you and require adjustments to the code so it fits the new constraints. Great a new problem! You have to find the fastest way to hack the code. This is fun until one or two things happen: the code you have to modify comes from a *bad* programmer or something breaks every time you modify something else. It will eventually work, but it’ll take a little longer than the previous iteration. This continues, you realise that the *bad* programmer is your past self from a few month ago and you fear modifying anything since you have no faith this [*Jenga*](https://secure.img1-fg.wfcdn.com/im/93997415/resize-h800%5Ecompr-r85/4885/48852016/Jenga%25AE+giant%25u2122+premium+jeu+de+bois+franc.jpg) will hold at all.

Reviewer: Great, (virgule)

Reviewer: This is great until one *of* two things ?

Reviewer: Modify sounds weird : alter, change, revise ?

Reviewer: A few month*s* ago

Author: xie xie fixed

> Maybe if you took a little more time to think of how future you would feel using it things would have been different. Maybe you would have cleaned the code. Maybe you would have explicated the [magic number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_number_(programming)) (why divide by 8.2?). Maybe some side effects would have been commented. Well this is not important for now, because the code *works*.

Reviewer: using it (manque qqch) things would ...

Reviewer: Explicate c'est très The Ol English lol

Author: xie xie fixed

Author: xie xie fixed

> But this did not apply to me. I could jump back in my code, read the witty comment I wrote and remember what `i`, `j` and `k` represented in the  matrix `X`. I make functions, so I [don't repeat myself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself). I had a bunch of smell tests that let me know if I broke something. No really, I mastered the art of programming.

Author: je voulais vraiment dire des "smell test" genre les tests non officiel que tu fais en regardant pis tu te dis ouais ca l'air bin beau

> But this did not apply to me. I could jump back in my code, read the witty comment I wrote and remember what dimension of the matrix `X` were represented by variable `i`, `j` and `k`. I make functions, so I [don't repeat myself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself). I had a bunch of smell tests that let me know if I break something. No really, I mastered the art of programming.

Reviewer: what dimension of the matrix : pas clair

Reviewer: broke somehting

Author: xie xie fixed

Author: xie xie fixed

## Until one day.

> I was working in a [Tech Startup](https://www.xpertsea.com/) and my team was working on a shrimp detection model. We were a few guys with different backgrounds. Everyone was a software engineers except for myself; I was an actuary holding the most statistical knowledge. We were pitted against one another to solve this shrimp detection problem. Plot twist. I was not the successful one, for reasons I was not even aware of.

Reviewer 2: ou "at a Tech" bla bla?

> I was working in a [Tech Startup](https://www.xpertsea.com/) and my team was working on a shrimp detection model. We were a few guys with different backgrounds. Everyone was a software engineers except for myself; I was an actuary holding the most statistical knowledge. We were pitted against one another to solve this shrimp detection problem. Plot twist. I was not the successful one, for reasons I was not even aware of.

Author: awesome oui je cherchais justement comment dire ca

> I was working in a [Tech Startup](https://www.xpertsea.com/) and my team was working on a shrimp detection model. We were a few guys with different backgrounds. Everyone were software engineers except for myself; I was an actuary holding the most statistical knowledge. We were pitted against one another to figure how to solve this shrimp detection problem. Plot twist. I was not the one achieving — and for reasons I was not even aware of.

Reviewer: Everyone was a software engineer

Reviewer: Ex-actuary ? :P

Reviewer: figure how : bizzare. solve the problem, figure out how

Reviewer: I was not the one achieving : ça veut dire quoi ? I was not in the lead ?

Author: xie xie fixed

> It started pretty well. I quickly build a script that let me grab the data from an unstructured source and convert it to a structured format. I would then run diagnosis to find any outliers or collinearity between features. Once the data was cleaned, another script generated a regression model using a step-wise algorithm. The model would generate predictions and save them into a file. The last script was doing graph and  basic analysis. Pretty standard data science duty. The report was done deal and I could quickly deliver great results to the team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It started pretty well. I quickly build a script that let me grab the data from an unstructured source and convert it to a structured format. I would then run diagnoses to find any outliers or collinearity between features. Once the data was cleaned, another script generated a regression model using a step-wise algorithm. The model would generate predictions and save them into a file. The last script was doing graphs and basic analyses. Pretty standard data science duty. The report was done deal and I could quickly deliver great results to the team.
```
Pluriels   (diagnoses, graphs, analyses)   et espace de trop

> It started pretty well. I quickly build a script that let me grab the data from an unstructured source and convert it to a structured format. I would then run some diagnosis to find any outliers or collinearity between features. Once the data was cleaned, another script generated a regression model using a step-wise algorithm. The model would generate some predictions and save them into a file. The last script was doing some graph and some basic analysis. Pretty standard data science duty. The report was done deal and I could quickly deliver some great results to the team.

Reviewer: built

Reviewer: run diagnostics (pas de some)

Reviewer: find : detect est plus approprié

Reviewer: generate predictions (pas de some)

Reviewer: was doing some graph and some basic analysis : pas anglais ça. outputed data visualisations and global statistics ?

Reviewer: was a done deal

Reviewer: deliver great results (pas de some)

> Then we had to evaluate the evolution of the model. This analysis became a weekly affair, then a daily one. Every day, the analysis got more complicated and the dataset got bigger and weirder. We cross-sectioned the data for certain shrimp providers, shrimp age, average size of shrimp, country, quality of water — name it. We changed the images processing method, we added countless custom features, we used various metrics, we corrected the dataset, etc. This is where I hit the wall. The software engineer guy was pumping his analysis a few hours before me, every day.

Reviewer: We cross-sectioned the data for certain shrimp : among au lieu de for ? je n'aime pas le for

Reviewer: water quality

Reviewer: image processing method

Reviewer: pas besoin de répéter le we

## Why isn't this working ?

> This called for my problem solving skills. How can I achieve faster production? By better understanding what he was doing.

Reviewer: This called : pas certain c'est quoi le is, surtout que tu change de section. this issue, fuckup, setback ?

> First thing I saw is the pre-processing step was nightly done by a robot. The second thing I saw was his cache, where all the data were ready for treatment and intermediate values were even pre-calculated (for data grouping and other analysis). The third thing was the modeling part, where everything was so tightly bundled that he could multi-thread all different data cross-sections in one operation. The best part of all this is — all those things were done by 9 am when he arrived. Least to say that gave him plenty of time to work on his analysis.

Reviewer: I saw was. aussi la structure de la phrase n'est pas super

Reviewer: same pour phrase 2

Reviewer: these ?

> I asked him if he could lend me a piece or two to integrate them into my scripts. As a good teammate, he obliged and provided me with a chunk of code. My pride was hurt enough that I went back to my desk alone and worked on it by myself. It was a relatively big chunk of code, so I expected a proportionate effort to plug everything and test. I opened the code and could quickly locate the line that would require modification. The music of typing was flowing into my ears — yes I had my mechanical keyboard at that time. It only took me around half an hour to do everything. I made it work without any unexpected side effects the first time I launched the script.

Reviewer: lend a piece of what

Reviewer: My pride was so hurt I went ...

What a great modification done by a great programmer.

## Wait.

> This is the moment the epiphany came. I was not the one have been doing a great job: my teammate was. He handed me some code that was so clean that anyone could quickly modify anything without unexpected side effect. Everything was self-explanatory, no comments lying around, no arbitrary numbers. The code had the perfect vertical and horizontal length and my solarized theme made the code look like a work of art. I experienced, what I thought at that time was, the holy grail of good code.

Reviewer: the one that had been doing

Reviewer: He handed me code

Reviewer: side effects

## Different solutions.

> First of all, there were things my teammate knew that i didn't know that i didn't know. Things like data pipeline, [design patterns](https://sourcemaking.com/design_patterns) and [principles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID), unit testing, [clean code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worship), software architecture, etc. These elements are the normal distribution for the actuary, the mean and variance for the statistician. The ground on which everything is build. Clearly my hacking and school background never prepared me for this.

Reviewer: I I pas i i

Reviewer: elements : mauvais mot

Reviewer: La loi normale a une moyenne et une variance. C'est comme si tu dit que les actuaires > statisticiens haha

Author: xie xie fixed

> My teammate had an holistic view of the problem. I was too busy *making things work* while my teammate was busy figuring *the best way* to make it work. This subtle difference is crucial. A good solution will make something work right now. The best solution makes something work right now AND consider the future user. Even if it means taking some extra time to step back and rebuild in the right direction.

Reviewer: build in the right direction (tu rebuild pas si tu sais où tu vas)

Author: xie xie fixed

> Clearly no solution could (or should) have initially planted all the seeds for the craziness that came after the first request. But my stubbornness to produce a quick solution building on my first design without reconsidering the paradigm shift in the problem doomed me in the long run.

Reviewer: after my first

Reviewer: building on my first design : recycling my first approach ? phrase pas claire

Reviewer: without reconsidering possible paradigm shifts

Author: xie xie fixed

## Clean slate.

> I enrolled in a software engineering certificate to rebuild a more stable foundation. This allowed me to open a huge Pandora’s box that uncover thought-provoking and mind breaking ideas and concepts. I believe I’m a better programmer than I was and I believe I have the tools to be a better one tomorrow.

Reviewer: build ? ou develop a stronger foundation

Reviewer: box uncovering thought-...

Author: xie xie fixed

> This articles is the first of many that will allow me to share those tools I found in that Pandora's box. These articles will be half philosophical and half technical. They will be centered around good practices in software engineering, while sharing some of my experience coping with (really) crappy code base. Crappy code base that have been written by me, of course.

Reviewer: this article

Reviewer: first of many in which I will share these

Reviewer: base that had ou has been

Author: xie xie fixed
